# reinforcement_learning_traci_sumo
Using Reinforcement Learning in Detection Systems to Modernize Traffic Control Algorithms

Increased amounts of traffic congestion continue to plague the streets of our cities, stemming from primitive, unchanged traffic control systems dating back to the 20th century. An interview with the Director of the San Jose Department of Traffic Transportation illustrated that our society needed a way to better optimize light phases, increasing the efficiency of our traffic signals.

In order to make our system dynamic, taking in and reacting to its environment, we opted to use a reinforcement learning model, or a Deep Q-Network (DQN). Last year, our creation of a supervised learning model showed promising results, yet was limited in its scope and feasibility. Through a DQN, our model would have the ability to learn even while deployed, getting better day by day. 

To train and test this AI model, a traffic simulator called SUMO (Simulation of Urban Mobility) was used. The model was trained on a simulation of Blossom Hill and Meridian Ave, an example environment of a generic 4-way traffic intersection. The San Jose Department of Transportation provided data to model the flow of traffic at this intersection, and our model was trained with the accurate traffic flow during morning rush hour. Reinforcement learning is a self-teaching-and-learning system that learns by trial and error, determining its actions by trying to maximize its rewards. By using this advanced variant of machine learning, we were able to implement our solution on a more complex intersection, as unlike our supervised learning project last year, we did not have to manually label the traffic data.

The trained model was run with same the traffic flow probability pattern as morning rush hour, and the average time lost by the simulation’s vehicles was computed. When compared to a simulation controlled by the traditional fixed duration system, the results were compelling.The AI model was tested against 10 random flow seeds and the intersection’s set of fixed light phase durations (data courtesy of SJDT), creating many different traffic patterns. The model’s demonstrated superior performance is sure to make traffic flow efficiently.

The research, development, and testing of an AI module has proven that an intricate city-wide network is not needed to improve traffic flow. Implementing separate, unconnected models reduces traffic in a given intersection, the task of doing so being both feasible and cost-efficient. By using the reinforcement learning technique, the algorithm behind its development can be further modified to incorporate more complex intersections, allowing the AI to be versatile. Such a model, easy to develop and implement, helps combat the issue of increasing levels of traffic, allowing for cities to reduce their carbon emission rates and create a more habitable environment for its people.
